So I defined my basic set up for a new node express rest API.
We have a route in its controller and now of course we need to return some data there,
so instead of the controller, in get posts we want to return some data because you learned rest APIs
are all about data.
We will not call res render in here because we will not render a view, you will not see me call res
render anymore again because rest APIs simply don't render views because they don't return html
and a rendered view is html. Instead we'll do something we already saw in the async request module of
this course,
we will return a json response. Json is a method provided by expressjs that allows us to conveniently
return a response with json data, with the right headers being set and so on. We can pass a normal
javascript object to json and it will be converted to the json format and sent back as a response to
the client who sent the request
and there, we can send anything you want, like post which could be an array of posts where we have a title,
first post and some content,
this is the first post
and of course I'm just making up things here,
this is of course just some dummy data.
So we call res json and this will send a json response.
Now when sending json responses, we also want to send the status code explicitly,
200 would be the default but we'll also work with different status codes throughout this module and we want
to be clear about the status code
our response has so that in the client we have an easy way of handling it because you always have to remember
that the client now has to render the user interface based on your response and therefore especially
error codes are super important to pass back to the client so that the client can just have a look at
the status code and find out
should I render my normal user interface because the requests suceeded or did I get an error
and I want to render an appropriate error interface.
Previously in the course we sent the whole interface so the client didn't have to worry about that,
now the client has to
and therefore setting the right status code is important.
Now with that, we have some logic in place to return some dummy data, with npm start
we can now start up our server here and now we have it running
and now we can visit a browser
and for now we can simply enter localhost 8080/feed/posts,
so this path we defined and you should get some json data here.
If you open your developer tools
and you go to the network tab in there and you reload that page, you also see that request here
and if you inspect it, you of course see the response body
but if you have a look at the headers, you see that in the response headers we see that application
json was set automatically by our server because we used that json method and we indeed get back
the content we defined here, we can see it here too.
So this is a quick and easy way of testing this.
Now obviously our users would never visit it like this,
they could if we don't require authentication at least
but this is of course not how we intend our API to be used,
instead we'll build a user interface that will then use this behind the scenes and render a beautiful
UI automatically with that data.
So directly accessing the data like this is of course not the plan.
Now before I come back to the user interface part though, let me show you how we can easily and conveniently
test our rest API even without entering this into the browser
and for that let me do something which
you couldn't enter into the browser,
let's define a post route.
So besides being able to get posts, we typically would also have some routes that allow us to add
new posts.
Now if we quickly think about our different http methods, then for posting new posts, post would be a great
http method.
We could also use put, that would not necessarily be wrong,
put would also be a valid method to be used for creating a resource but especially when we're talking
about posts and not something like user data which only exists once but posts,
there might be multiple posts and therefore adding or appending sounds good to me and hence I want to
use the post method instead of put. If we were to manage the user data here, then maybe put might be better
because there we indeed create or overwrite the resource.
So post it is and hence I will name this post post which sounds a bit strange,
it's just my naming convention,
I have the http method first and then basically the object that's gets created.
You could name this totally different,
you could name this create post if you want to,
let's maybe name it like this because it's clearer
then I have my normal function, that of course does not change
and here, we would of course reach out to the database. We'll do so soon,
for now I'll just note that we have to create that in the database and I will just return the response
assuming that we did create a post.
So I'll send back a json response and there we might be having a message like posts created successfully
and we send back some post data
and now that is at least data I want to parse from the incoming request.
So I expect to get a title let's say
and I still parse that on the request body,
so essentially what we always did throughout this course and I might be extracting a content too, also from
request body, just what we did throughout the course.
And here I return the created post with an ID that was generated automatically let's say
as mongodb does it for us, here
I'm just doing it with some dummy code and the title which I received and the content and this could
just be the confirmation that it was stored in the database successfully
which of course it wasn't thus far but which we'll add. Now
first of all, I also want to set a special status code here with the status method,
I want to set it to 201.
The default would be 200
and this would not be horribly wrong but 201 is the better status code to use
if you want to tell the client success a resource was created. Just 200 is just success,
201 also indicates that we created a resource
and of course we did here at least in theory
so manually setting this makes a lot of sense.
With that we're sending this success code,
now what is missing? Well a way of parsing that data. I did install body parser in an earlier lecture but
we also need to set it up
and now here's one important thing. You need to remember that we are working with incoming json data,
we expect our clients to communicate with our API, with requests that contain json data just as we
return json data. Json data is the data format we want to use both for requests and for responses
and therefore I will use my body parser of course,
that's why I installed it,
so let's require it here in our app.js file
but when I initialize it, I initialize it differently than what we used it for
in the majority of the course because there I initialized it by calling url encoded and configuring
that.
Now this is great for data formats or for requests that hold data in the format of xwww form url
encoded,
you might remember we saw that in earlier lectures too.
Now this is the default data that data has if submitted through a form post request.
We don't need that here
however, we don't need form data,
we have no form data
instead we want to use body parser with the json method which is able to parse json data from incoming
requests.
So this is good for application json as is the official name that you will find in the header
and this is how the data will be appended to the request that reaches our server.
So we need this middleware to parse incoming json data so that we are able to extract it on the body
because that will be added by our body parser, this body field on the incoming request.
With that we can extract all that data but how can we now test this?
We can't create a form in which we submit because then we would be back to xwww form url encoded
data and it would not be a realistic test because you just don't use forms like this when working with
rest APIs,
instead you can use a very handy special tool and that is postman.
Now we will build or work with a real frontend very soon,
no worries,
so we'll not be stuck to some helping tool for the rest of this course but it's still a very useful API
development tool which you should be aware of.
It's free to use and you can simply google for it to get it from getpostman.com, there you can
just download postman and walk through the installer.
Again you don't need to pay,
you don't need to sign up,
it might ask you for that but you don't need to.
Once you did load it, you'll end up on a starting page like this you can just close that window and you'll
then end up in a user interface like this one.
Now you can read the official postman docs to learn about all the things you can do but in the end what
you can do is you can enter a
url here, then choose your different http methods and you see more than I showed you but you won't
need most of them,
they're not required for typical crud operations.
So you can choose your method here and then send a request,
you can also add your own headers and you will see the response in the area below this.
So here I can send a request to localhost 8080 which is where my node server runs on and then
feed/host,
this should be the route I want to reach this controller on.
Now for that I first of all need to create the route.
So in my feed routes file, I'll add a post route for /posts where I use the feed controller create post
action,
so this will be reached through a post request to feed/posts.
Let's configure such a request here, feed/posts, this is exactly where I'm sending it to
and now I just need to switch to the post method.
Now with that switched, I also need to be able to send some data and you see that the body tab now got
enabled, with get it was disabled because get requests can't hold a body, post requests can. Here you
can now choose your format and we don't need any of these,
instead I'll choose raw
and then there in the dropdown, json, application json.
So now here we can write some json data
and json has a format where you have two surrounding curly braces and then you have key value pairs
where if you're writing it manually, the keys have to be wrapped in double quotation marks.
So here we can see what we expect to get,
we expect to get a title and we expect to get a content,
so we want to pass these two fields to our server.
So here we can pass the title and this can be my first post
or actually my second post because we use the first one as a dummy post in our get route and then
here, we have the content, this is the content of my first post or of my second post of course.
So this is now my request,
we can now click send and we get back a response which looks good because it's the response I defined in
my controller action with this message and the post that was created
and this is now the data we would typically use in our receiving client.
You also see the headers that were sent on the response, these were set automatically by express especially
application json matters of course and this is now how we can test all our endpoints because we can
just enter them here and then switch the http methods, pass any extra headers or bodies we might need
and therefore we get everything we need to test our API.
Still we will also work with a real frontend so that we have something beautiful to look at and to
see that in a real app
but this is a tool you will use a lot
when working with rest
APIs.